# Intermediate Representations in Imperative Compilers: A Survey

_James Stanier and Des Watson, ACM Comput. Surv. 45, 3, Article 26, June 2013, Pages 1-27._

## Commentary

I found this to be a refreshingly readable and useful survey paper, and I'll likely be falling back on it when I need that two paragraph reminder of how a given IR works. Section 6 (Classification and Usage) ended up being my favorite part of the read, especially the juxtaposition of the trends in academic research on IRs and their adoption in mainstream commercial compilers. I enjoyed the authors' observation that the PDG in particular lies in this interesting space of having extremely high academic engagement yet very little adoption in industry. And I mostly agreed with their speculation that the reasons may boil down to (1) it's more space inefficient and "viscous" (i.e., resistant to change) than SSA and (2) it's just more difficult to understand and, hence, implement. I was a little more skeptical of their belief that another contributing factor was the absence of multicore machines in the mainstream. 11 years on from this paper and with those machines much more available, I'd be curious to know if their prediction that, "The time for using the PDG, VDG-like representations may be now (2013)" rings true. My speculation is that exploiting multicore parallelism—which seemed to be the main motivation for these IRs—is being tackled in different ways, perhaps in the semantics of the memory model (e.g., in this work on Multicore OCaml: https://kcsrk.info/papers/pldi18-memory.pdf). Just to satisfy my curiosity, I did a bit of digging in the Cranelift and LLVM documentation to see if there are any references to the PDG; while I found one reference in the LLVM docs, a quick inspection of the `Analysis` directory in the repo revealed that the `PDGBuilder` class referenced in the documentation doesn't exist 😂.
